What to Know About the Immigration Protests in Los Angeles

By Yan ZhuangAnushka PatilRemy Tumin and John Yoon

Los Angeles braced for more confrontations between law enforcement and protesters against President Trump’s immigration policies, as the administration escalated the federal response to the demonstrations, deploying the Marines and more National Guard troops to California.

The protests, which began on Friday, were largely peaceful. They were calmer by Monday though they spread across downtown Los Angeles and its suburbs, and to other cities across the country, in a sign of the widening anger over the aggressive federal deployment.

President Trump mobilized the troops in a mission that officials said was meant to protect federal property and agents, doing so over the objections of officials in California and Los Angeles. The weekend of clashes between law enforcement and demonstrators led to about 150 arrests, and the police fired munitions that left protesters and journalists injured.

The state of California on Monday filed suit against the Trump administration over its move to take control of the state’s National Guard and deploy troops to Los Angeles. California Gov. Gavin Newsom also said that he would file a lawsuit to prevent the Marines from being deployed.

How did the protests develop?

Protests broke out on Friday when federal agents searched the city’s garment district for workers whom they suspected of being undocumented immigrants, as part of the Trump administration’s new focus on raiding workplaces.

The agents were met by protesters who chanted and threw eggs before being dispersed by law enforcement with pepper spray and nonlethal bullets.

Demonstrations continued Saturday, both downtown and in the mostly Latino and working-class suburb of Paramount, about 15 miles to the south. Law enforcement officers made arrests and in some cases used crowd-control munitions like tear gas and flash-bang grenades against the protesters.

People from cities across the United States have held protests in solidarity with those in Los Angeles against the Trump administration’s immigration raids.CreditCredit...Andri Tambunan for The New York Times
Mr. Trump signed a memo on Saturday ordering 2,000 National Guard members to deploy to Los Angeles to protect federal officers conducting immigration operations, despite the objections of Mr. Newsom and Mayor Karen Bass of Los Angeles.

On Sunday, nearly 300 members of the California National Guard took positions in the city. Demonstrations on Sunday afternoon near a downtown detention center were largely peaceful, but some protesters shot fireworks at police officers under a bridge on the nearby U.S. 101 freeway. Several driverless Waymo cars were set on fire in downtown Los Angeles.

The protests were “getting increasingly worse and more violent,” Chief Jim McDonnell of the L.A.P.D. said on Sunday, blaming the violence on “anarchists” and “people who do this all the time,” not people protesting immigration raids.

Mr. Trump on Monday doubled the number of deployed California Guard troops to 4,000 and mobilized a battalion of 700 Marines to the city. Before their arrival on Monday night, there were about 1,700 soldiers in Los Angeles.

Who calls in the National Guard?

The National Guard is the only branch of the military that can be deployed both by state governors and by the president. Governors almost always control deployment in their states.

The Guard operates similarly to the Army’s reserve force. Most of its members do not serve full time. They generally hold civilian jobs and attend regular training sessions, and are called into active service only when needed. The Guard is most often called upon during disasters like hurricanes, floods and wildfires.

Before Mr. Trump’s move, the last time a president activated a state’s National Guard troops for such a purpose without being asked to do so by the state’s governor was in 1965, according to Elizabeth Goitein, senior director of the Liberty and National Security Program at the Brennan Center for Justice, an independent law and policy organization.

On that occasion, she said, President Lyndon B. Johnson used troops to protect civil rights demonstrators in Alabama.
